Activation metric blog post (#9774)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/product-engineers/activation-metrics.mdx

---
date: 2024-11-05
title: How we found our activation metric (and how you can too)
author:
  - raquel-m-smith
featuredImage: >-
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/posthog.com/contents/images/blog/posthog-marketing/marketing-hog.jpg
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
  - Product analytics
  - Product engineers
  - Growth
  - Inside PostHog
crosspost:
  - Blog
---

> Activation AKA your product's "ah-ha" moment and the second A in the [AARRR pirate funnel framework](/product-engineers/aarrr-pirate-funnel). It's the thing that lets you know if your users are going to find success with your product.

Reviewer: "The second A in AARRR" sentence feels unnatural and that we're doing link-stuffing. Would be better to remove.

Intro could use a slight rework too. Below my suggested, feel free to tweak

```suggestion
Your product's "ah-ha" moment is the moment users really experience the value of your product for the first time. Measuring how many users reach this point, a.k.a activation, is crucial to growing your app. Unfortunately, it can also be difficult to define correctly. 
```

In a word, it's _important_, but it's also really difficult to define.

> We have 8+ products and users get activated into _each_ separately. Each also has 10+ events that we could use as an activation metric. 
> 
> This means we spent a lot of time figuring out how to _figure out_ what our activation metrics are. Lucky for you, we did this all inside of PostHog, so we figured we'd share it with you, so you can do the same!

Reviewer: - Not sure if Im a fan of the +, but feel free to keep
- "figuring out how to figure out" reads slighly awkward (I get what you're trying to do though)
- Not sure I like the  sentence"Lucky for you, we did this all inside of PostHog, so we figured we'd share it with you, so you can do the same!". Feels a bit condescending. I don't have an alternative, though

```suggestion
We have more than 8 products and each also has more than 10 events that we could use as for activation, so we've spent a lot of time thinking about it. 

Lucky for you, we did this all inside of PostHog, so we figured we'd share it with you, so you can do the same!

```

> But before we jump in... what even _is_ activation?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But before we jump in... what is activation _really_?
```

> ## What is an activation metric?

Reviewer: I think this section should short and to the point as possible. It should also build more on the intro (we mention the "aha moment", so lets continue on that theme)

Reviewer 2: With images, I think the length is ok

> ## What is an activation metric?

Reviewer: We should also add subheadings or bullets on "What makes a good activation metric" and/or "what makes a bad activation metric". 

An anecdote from my time at Facebook: It needs to be easy to A/B test with. 

We were working on a slack-like product. Our data scientist figured out that a company had the highest chances of retaining if they x number of users posting in the app after 30 days. 

This was the most accurate, but we couldn't run A/b tests with it. So our DS figured out that a metric that was highly correlated with this was "14 days since the company signed up, 3 users have posted in the last 7 days"

We worked with this metric for 6 months, but still our A/B tests took too long (we had to wait about 5 weeks, since we needed 3 weeks worth of data, but needed to wait for each company to be 14 days old).

The next iteration was "8 days since the company signed up, 2 users have posted in the last 7 days). This was highly correlated with 14-day metric, which was correlated with the 7-day.

This metrics was more workable, since it meant we could run expierments for 3-4 weeks instead of 5

Reviewer 2: I tried writing this section but it ended up being way too vague to be useful. The anecdote is a really good one though 😅

An activation metric is a set of actions a user performs that are correlated with greater retention.

> In other words, imagine you have actions A through Z. If doing actions D, K, and L make users more likely to use your platform down the line, then D, K, and L combined are your activation metric. We might think that actions B, F, and G are good things for them to do, but if they aren't correlated with retention, then they aren't part of your activation metric.

Reviewer: This was super hard to follow with all the letters. Maybe this should be an image, or a bulleted list, or somethign else

> At PostHog, we look for a set of actions that mean someone is much more likely to be using the product 3 months later. In the case of [session replay](/session-replay), after analyzing multiple potential metrics, we found that these were watching 5 or more replays and setting a replay filter at least once.

Reviewer: In the spirit of keeping this section short (as mentioned in my comment above), perhaps this posthog example should be the start of a new section

Maybe "## An example from PostHog" or something similar. Makes the blog easier to skim too

This definition solves the trickiest part of defining an activation metric: it could be _anything_. Does a pageview mean someone is activated? Does completing onboarding? What about creating their first object? Depending on your product, any of these could be it. Their impact on retention makes it clear. 

> ## How did we find _our_ activation metric?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How we found our activation metric?
```

How did we settle on `watching 5 or more replays and setting a replay filter at least once`? We tested a lot of different metrics by:

1. Creating a big list of events that we thought might "hook" users into using our product.

> 2. Creating groups of 3-5 events that you can test together. We aimed for 5-10 different groupings, including the number of times the event occurs (e.g. watched 5 replays vs. watched 1 replay). Sometimes users have to do something more than once to reach their "ah-ha" moment.

Reviewer: This all feels very high level, which isnt that helpful IMO. Can we get more specific?

Reviewer 2: Added image to clarify

3. Writing a query to test how the event groupings improve retention (see below).

4. Comparing each group of events against our average retention rate for all users. We looked for a retention percentage that's nominally higher than our average retention rate.

After testing multiple groupings, we found that `watching 5 or more replays and setting a replay filter at least once` was the set of events that resulted in the highest retention rate, meaning it was our activation metric.

> ## Our query for testing potential activation metrics

Reviewer: I really like this section. I think each part could use a "How to do this in posthog"
You can use the <detail> component to hide it so that it doesn't take up all the space + still makes it relevant for non-posthog users

Reviewer 2: The sections are too thin without the code and don't take up too much space.

Reviewer 2: Its mostly about the query.

How can you recreate this process for yourself? Creating the grouping of potential activation events is easy, but the retention testing query is the tricky part. 

To help you out, we've included the exact query we used below. If you use PostHog, you can use our same exact query to explore your data and find your activation metric. First, I'll break the query into parts to explain what's happening, then I'll provide the whole thing in one chunk at the end.

> **Note:** This query gets retention at the **group** level using [group analytics](/docs/product-analytics/group-analytics). This means that anyone in the group (eg. customer, organization [what we use], work unit - whatever your groups are) can perform the event and it counts towards activation. If you want to get retention at the **person** level, you can use the same query but replace group references with person ones like changing `group_id` to `distinct_id`.

> ### Part 1: Get the groups who started with your product, broken down by month

Reviewer: It's probably easier to just say "company" here instead of "groups", since its more intuitive that way + most companies will be b2b sass. 
We can also mention what to do if you're b2c

author:
  - raquel-m-smith
featuredImage: >-
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/posthog.com/contents/images/blog/hog_ql.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
  - Product analytics
  - Product engineers
  - Growth
  - Inside PostHog
crosspost:
  - Blog
---

People are signing up for your product. Great! But before you start planning your IPO, you need to make sure they actually become users. This is the goal of **activation**, AKA the "ah-ha" moment of your product.

The trouble with activation is that it is a lot harder to define than a user signing up. For example, we have 8+ products and each requires a separate activation metric. On top of that, each product also has 10+ events that could be part of its activation metric.

This means we spent a lot of time figuring out the best way to repeatedly discover a product's activation metric. We're sharing our process here to help you do the same.

But before we jump in... what is activation _really_?

## What is an activation metric?

An activation metric is a set of actions a user performs that are correlated with greater retention after a user first starts using the product.

> Focusing on retention solves the trickiest part of defining an activation metric: it could be _anything_. Does a pageview mean someone is activated? Does completing onboarding? What about creating their first object? Depending on your product, any of these could be it. Looking at their impact on retention, however, makes it clear what helps your users succeed.

Reviewer 2: rewrote

![Session replay activation metric](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/Clean_Shot_2024_11_06_at_10_40_35_2x_a07c5ba4fd.png)

Actions that don't make it into your activation metric can still be good, but they don't help you predict retention. For example, we want users to capture replays, but we found that doing so doesn't mean they stick around, so optimizing this isn't the best use of our time.

## How we found our activation metric

How did we settle on watching 5 or more replays and setting a replay filter at least once? We tested a lot of different metrics by:

1. Creating a big list of events that we thought might "hook" users into using our product.

2. Creating groups of 3-5 events to test together. We aimed for 5-10 different groups, including the number of times the event occurs (e.g. watched 5 replays vs. watched 1 replay). Sometimes users have to do something more than once to reach their "ah-ha" moment.

![Event groups](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/Clean_Shot_2024_11_06_at_11_36_20_2x_89a95ebdf3.png)

> 3. Writing a query to test how the event groups improve retention (see below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Writing a query to test how the event groups correlate with retention (see below).
```

  AND event IN ('certain page viewed', 'thing saved to db', 'button clicked', 'logged in')
)
SELECT
    starting_companies.start_month,
    COUNT(DISTINCT starting_companies.company_id) as total_starting_companies,
    COUNT(DISTINCT successful_companies.company_id) as total_companies_activated,
    round((COUNT(DISTINCT successful_companies.company_id) * 100.0 / coalesce(COUNT(DISTINCT starting_companies.company_id), 0)), 2) as activation_percentage,
    COUNT(DISTINCT CASE WHEN retained.company_id IS NOT NULL THEN successful_companies.company_id else null END) as total_activated_companies_survived,
    round((COUNT(DISTINCT retained.company_id) * 100.0 / coalesce(COUNT(DISTINCT successful_companies.company_id), 0)), 2) as retained_percentage_of_activated
FROM starting_companies
LEFT JOIN successful_companies ON starting_companies.company_id = successful_companies.company_id
LEFT JOIN retained ON successful_companies.company_id = retained.company_id
GROUP BY starting_companies.start_month
ORDER BY starting_companies.start_month
```
</details>

## What do I do with the activation metric once I find it?

> You push for it, of course! If you know you the actions you want people to do, you can:

Reviewer: I think "push for it" is the wrong term here. So is my suggestion ("improving them"). What we're really trying to say is that you focus your product efforts in increasing these metrics. I dont know what the elegant way to say this is
```suggestion
You work on improving them, of course! If you know you the actions you want people to do, you can:
```

> - Email them about it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create email campaigns around them
```

---
date: 2024-11-13
title: How we found our activation metric (and how you can too)
author:
  - raquel-m-smith
featuredImage: >-
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/posthog.com/contents/images/blog/hog_ql.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
  - Product analytics
  - Product engineers
  - Growth
  - Inside PostHog
crosspost:
  - Blog
---

People are signing up for your product. Great! But before you start planning your IPO, you need to make sure they actually stick around. This is the goal of **activation**.

> The trouble with activation is that it is hard to define. Many say it is when a user reaches the "aha" moment of your product, but this is vague and different for everyone.

Reviewer: <a href="https://gitme.me/image?url=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia1.giphy.com%2Fmedia%2F3WCNY2RhcmnwGbKbCi%2Fgiphy.gif&token=yes" data-gitmeme-token="yes"><img src="https://media1.giphy.com/media/3WCNY2RhcmnwGbKbCi/giphy.gif" title="Created by gitme.me with /yes"
        alt="yes"/></a>

> For example, we have 8+ products and each has a different set of activation metrics from launching a survey to inviting a teammate to creating two or more dashboards. What made finding activation metrics tricky was that each product had 10+ events that **could** be part of its activation metric.
> 
> This means we spent a lot of time discovering our products' activation metrics. We're sharing our process here to help you do the same.

Reviewer: I think this gets the point across clearer
```suggestion
For example, we have 8+ products. Each product has 10+ events that **could** be part of its activation metric. This means we spent a lot of time discovering our products' activation metrics. We're sharing our process here to help you do the same.
```

But before we jump in... what is activation _really_?

## What is an activation metric?

> Activation metrics are a set of actions a new user performs that are correlated with greater retention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Activation metrics are a set of actions a new user performs that correlate with greater retention.
```

> Focusing on retention solves the trickiest part of defining an activation metric: it could be _anything_. Does completing onboarding count as activation? Creating their first object? How about inviting a teammate? Depending on your product, any or all of these could be an activation metric. It is **retention** that makes it clear.

Reviewer: Since this paragraph leads with "focusing on retention", it reads better to focus the rest of the paragraph on it to highlight what we mean. Else its a bit confusing why we mean you should focus on retention
```suggestion
Focusing on retention solves the trickiest part of defining an activation metric: Does completing onboarding mean a user is going to retain? What about creating their first object? Inviting a teammate? Depending on your product, any or all of these could correlate with increased retention, and thus could be your activation metric
```

> Focusing on retention solves the trickiest part of defining an activation metric: it could be _anything_. Does a pageview count as activation? How about inviting a teammate? Creating their first object? Depending on your product, any or all of these could be an activation metric. It is **retention** that makes it clear.

Reviewer: I think pageview isnt a good example. Not sure what could be better though. 
```suggestion
Focusing on **retention** is the trickiest part of defining an activation metric: it could be _anything_. Does spending 10 or more minutes in your app count as activation? How about inviting a teammate? Creating their first object? Depending on your product, any or all of these could play a part in retention
```

Reviewer 2: Changed the example to "completing onboarding" but this wording changes the meaning. I am trying to say that activation could be anything, but you want to find the metrics that have the biggest impact on retention and then work backwards if that makes sense.

> At PostHog, we define activation metrics as a set of actions where a company is much more likely to be using the product 3 months after starting. For [session replay](/session-replay), after analyzing multiple potential metrics, we found that watching 5 or more replays and setting a replay filter at least once were the actions that resulted in the highest retention rate.

Reviewer: > At PostHog, we define activation metrics as a set of actions where a company is much more likely to be using the product 3 months after starting.

This feels like we're redefining it again, even though we defned it above. I dont htink we need to mention the 3 or more months bit, since we already covered retention above.
```suggestion
Here are example of how've defined activation at PostHog:

- For [session replay](/session-replay) we found that watching 5 or more replays and setting a replay filter at least once were the actions that resulted in the highest retention rate.
- Another example...
- Another example...
```

Reviewer 2: I see it as giving a specific example. This is just a narrower version of the definition above that works for us at PostHog.

Reviewer: At the very least we should rephrase the opening sentence. What I mean by its confusing is that we do the following:
1. Heading is "what is activation"
2. First paragraph defines what it is ("activation metris are a set ....")
3. But then we say "we define activation metrics"). Which makes it seem like we introduced a second definition. 

Also, the sentence `we define activation metrics as a set of actions where a company is much more likely to be using the product 3 months after starting.` sounds like the definition of retention to me? Its a bit confusing.

IMO I dont think we need all of this. We've already given the defintions, so thats why I think if we include examples it makes everything clearer.

e.g.
- For session replay, our metrics are xyz
- For product analytics, our metrics are abc
- For surveys, our metrics are mny

![Session replay activation metric](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/Clean_Shot_2024_11_06_at_10_40_35_2x_a07c5ba4fd.png)

Actions that don't make it into your activation metric can still be good, but they don't help you predict retention. For example, we want users to invite teammates, but we found that doing so doesn't mean they stick around, so optimizing this isn't the best use of our time.

> ![Product analytics activation](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/Clean_Shot_2024_11_13_at_09_53_01_2x_2c8bc81896.png)

Reviewer: nice

## How we found our activation metric

> How did we settle on watching 5 or more replays and setting a replay filter at least once? We tested a lot of different metrics by:

Reviewer: This will need to change if we add more examples above (see previous commetn)

1. Creating a big list of events that we thought might "hook" users into using our product.

2. Creating groups of 3-5 events to test together. We aimed for 5-10 different groups, including the number of times the event occurs (e.g. watched 5 replays vs. watched 1 replay). Sometimes users have to do something more than once to reach their "ah-ha" moment.

> ![Event groups](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/Clean_Shot_2024_11_06_at_11_36_20_2x_89a95ebdf3.png)

Reviewer: Right now this image is a lot of text. Perhaps some colours in the this image would make it easier to parse.

Reviewer 2: How's this?

![CleanShot 2024-11-18 at 12 50 05@2x](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fe2efb8f-018a-4943-a1ef-72d7139fb836)

Reviewer: Much better!

3. Writing a query to test how the event groups correlate with retention (see below).

4. Comparing each event group against our average retention rate for all users. We looked for a retention percentage that's nominally higher than our average retention rate.

After testing multiple event groups, we found that watching 5 or more replays and setting a replay filter at least once was the set of events that resulted in the highest retention rate, meaning it was our activation metric.

## Our query for testing potential activation metrics

How can you recreate this process for yourself? Creating the groups of potential activation events is easy, but the retention testing query is the tricky part. 

> To help you out, we've included the exact query we used below. If you use PostHog, you can create a [new SQL insight](https://us.posthog.com/insights/new) and use our same exact query to explore your data and find your activation metric. First, I'll break the query into parts to explain what's happening, then I'll provide the whole thing in one chunk [at the end](#the-final-combined-query).

Reviewer: This might read a bit nicer.
```suggestion
To help you out, we've included the exact query we used below. First, I'll break the query into parts to explain what's happening, then I'll provide the whole thing in one chunk [at the end](#the-final-combined-query).

If you use PostHog, you can create a [new SQL insight](https://us.posthog.com/insights/new) and use our same exact query to explore your data and find your activation metric
```

> > **Note:** This query gets retention at the **company** level using [group analytics](/docs/product-analytics/group-analytics). This means that anyone in the group (e.g. customer, organization (what we use), work unit - whatever your groups are) can perform the event and it counts towards activation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Our example queries retention at the **company level** using [group analytics](/docs/product-analytics/group-analytics). This means that anyone in the company can perform the event and it counts towards activation. This makes the most sense for B2B SaaS products like ours.
```

> 

> > If you want to get retention at the **person** level, you can use the same query but replace company references with person ones like changing `company_id` to `distinct_id`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If you want to get retention at the **person level**, you can use the same query but replace company references with person ones like changing `company_id` to `distinct_id`.
```

---

> date: 2024-11-13

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
date: 2024-11-28
```
